So in this video, we're going to complete
the derivation of the spectrum or
dispersion relation of quantum phonons and
well this part as well as the previous
part is a bit technical so I will actually
skip some of the calculations and
we'll just show you the method,
illustrate the method which is called
by the way Bogoliubov transformation
that is used to solve such a problem.
And as a sad remark, let me mention here
that well, this material that I'm going to
be covering is actually pretty advanced
graded material, so if you've got to
this point, you should be proud of
yourself, this is very complicated.
Very advanced material of quantum
many body of physics here,
we're actually studying.
So in this slide, I would like to review
the calculations we have done so far.
Tell you where we have been and
also where we're going with this.
And as we know, we started with
this classical oscillator chain.
Which is characterized by the coordinates
and momento of all the atoms in this one
dimensional crystal and the first
step in putting together the quantum
problem was to quantize this
which means basically to
replace the variables x and
p with the operators.
And so we just put hats on top of x,
p and h.
So the following step involved
expressing these momenta and
coordinates with
the corresponding creation and
annihilation operators which led to
this complicated looking Hamiltonian and
here this a n and a n dagger
correspond to creating an oscillation
In a particular side with
a particular atom labeled by m.
So the next step that we took in the
previous segment was essentially to forget
transform this creation and
annihilation operators and
to express them in the q space In
the wave vectors space if you want.
And the corresponding
Hamiltonian is shown here.
So it has, as you can see,
two types of terms, a dagger and a.
And this aq, a-q.
And so
now we have to work with this operators,
this new creation and annihilation
operators, and this Hamiltonian.
And now I'm coming to where
we're going with this.
So if we did not have, let's imagine for
a second that we do not have this term.
Let's say we have just this term,
so if this were the case, it would have
meant that we already solved the problem.
The reason for
this being that this linear combination,
the integral linear combination
of these independent a dagger as,
they sort of correspond to a collection
of independent harmonic oscillators,
the spectrum of which,
we know perfectly well.
So for each q, we have basically
a simple harmonic oscillator
such as in the previous lecture,
and we know its spectrum.
And now, we just collect these oscillators
and write them as an integral but
all in all, we know the result.
So this is essentially already a solution.
And therefore, this a of q or more
precisely actually the Hermitian conjugate
part here twice a of q, would have
been in the spectrum of our problem,
the spectrum of these quantum forms,
but of course we do have this term
we do have this term, and
we don't know what to do with it right.
So this in the spectrum of this
Hamiltonian is not at all obvious.
So a way to solve the problem
now is to actually to construct
a new set of creation and
annihilation operators.
So here I have an operator b,
which is an annihilation operator of new
type and there's also a b dagger of q.
And so let's assume that we
can transcribe this b and
b dagger as a linear combination of a and
a dagger.
In such a way that the new Hamiltonian
won't have the bad trumes.
By bad trumes, I mean the trumes that
we don't know how to deal with and
instead we'll have only this sort of
standard combination of b dagger and b for
which the spectrum is obvious and
so this essentially would
mean to solve the problem.
The ability to write the Hamiltonian
in this form, in the form of a linear
combination of some creation and
annihilation operator of this sort.
So would mean to solve the problem in this
lies that would give us the dispersion
relation of this best Which
actually are the quantum formulas.
Since we will see, so this b,
dagger hat, and b hat,
they correspond to creation and
angulation operators of quantum phonons.
Essentially the normal modes, quantize
normal modes in this oscillator chain.
But together as well as you
can see is rather non-trivial.
First we have to do this quantization and
then, well I wish it was simple.
But then,
we have to do at least three linear
transformations to get to this point.
And this last linear
transformation is what
is actually known as
the Bogoliubov transformation.
So here's a picture of a younger Nicolai
Bogoliubov who was a very influential and
talented mathematical physicist,
a Russian mathematical physicist.
And he was an author of
many very important works.
And also, he came up with
a number of very important and
practical mathematical methods that
are used up to these days, and
one of these methods is this
Bogoliubov transformation that we're
going to be studying, and let me mention
that this Bogoliubov transformation
is still used very actively
in research papers.
I myself have used it in
a number of my published works.
And this is basically, in some sense,
an every day tool of theorists
working in quantum physics and
in condensed matter physics as
well perhaps high energy physics.
So this is an important method.
But in the example that we're
going to be considering.
Today so
the method is rather straightforward and
we already advertised the motivation for
using this method.
So let's look again at this Hamiltonian
that we have for the original creation and
annihilation operators a sub q dagger and
a sub q.
So and again as I said,
so our strategy would be
to correct in some sense the definition
of the creation annihilation operators so
we can get rid of this unwanted term.
And if you look at this Hamiltonian,
you will see that this
Hamiltonian involves essentially, so
if we didn't have this term again, so
we would have had just a linear
combination of independent q operators.
But this term, the appearance of this
term couples the q mode with -q mode.
So whatever transformation
we come up with,
it should probably involve a linear
combination of at least aq and a -q.
So let me just present a forum,
sort of knowing the result of course it's
easy, but it will save us some time.
So let me just present a forum of
this generic Bogoliubov transform
that accomplishes what I want, namely that
introduces new operators in this case,
these are these operators b of q and
b daggers of q which
are linear combination of a and
a dagger and vice versa a and
a dagger are linear combinations
of both b and b dagger is here.
And so here, I will assume and
this assumption will be
verified sort of at the.
And let me assume that these coefficients
can be chosen to real numbers, well,
functions better to say.
And that they're even functions of q.
So u of q is equal to u of -q.
So in this case, actually this second
definition here is redundant because
the second definition of the equation
operator can be obtained from the.
Definition of an English operator simply
by applying the emission conjugation.
But in any case, so let us assume that
we can construct such an operator.
So the first thing we need to do and this
is, basically I'm describing the strategy
of instructing buggaloo of transforms
Is to make sure that this v and
v-hat are indeed creation and
annihilation operators.
So I can call them such, but
actually this should have
a precise mathematical meaning.
And the precise meaning
would be that these guys.
So, say if I have b of some q and
b of p, let's say dagger,
so this guys should be the commentator so
this guy should be zero.
So if p is not equal to b then
it should be a delta function,
otherwise anything otherwise is of no
sense so this is what I'm looking for.
So my a and a dagger, so
the reason I call them creation and
undulation operators is that
they satisfy this relation.
Now the new operators occur actually
a linear combination of those two satisfy
the same computational relief.
So and this would involve a calculation
which would result in a constraint
on these coefficients u and v.
So if I calculate this computation
regulation that I already know, so
this is a commentator of a of q and
a daggers of p so
I simply plug in these
definitions to here and
this guy to here where they're
replacing q with p, and
I just calculate
the commutators term by term.
So what I can write, I can just write.
So I will have one, two, three,
four, four different terms.
So the first term, let's say will be
the commutator of these two guys.
So, such as here, and
using this constraint, I will require that
the commutator of these two guys would
be 2 pi delta function q minus p.
Now these two commutators
which result in this term
should give me 0 because these
both are annihilation operators so
likewise these two guys resulting
in this term should give
me 0 as well because these are commutators
of the creation operators, and
so finally I have a term which
couples b dagger of minus q and
b of minus p and
well since the commutator b b dagger is
equal to well this delta function,
The commentator would be dagger and
b is basically minus the commentator and b
dagger so it should give me this function.
And let me remind you that the delta
function involved here is actually
a living function so it doesn't really
matter that I have here minus signs,
et cetera.
So if I put everything together so this
guys' basically go away, right, so these
guys go away and we have these two terms
that essentially all involve the same
Delta functions and also since there is
a delta function here, q is actually to p.
So the delta function is
0 if q is not equal to p.
And so, there are only terms,
therefore, I can simply write it as,
let's say, u sub q squared and
this guy will be v sub q squared.
Now with a minus sign.
So if I put everything together from
this expression, so this is what I get.
And now I'll have to require that
the right hand side produces what is
supposed to be in the left hand side.
That it is this 2 pi delta function.
q minus p.
So which means that this
coefficient here so
this u squared minus 3 squared
must be identically equal to one.
And this introduces a constraint and
important constraint on this
Bogoliubov transformation.
So, basically what we're doing here,
again, so
let me sort of go back to
where we're going with this.
So, we want to put together
at this new operators.
And so we want to find explicitly
the expressions for this u sub q and
v sub q that first the wall would
ensure that this b and bw md,
the annihilation and
creation operators of something.
And second, another constraint
on these guys would be that
the resulting Hamiltonian now
expressed in terms of b and
d dagger could be simple enough so
that we know its solution.
And this is basically the essence
of Bogoliubov transformation.
So in this case, Because Bogoliubov
transformation is relatively simple and
actually most cases you will see
in the research literature it is
relatively simple but
in general it' may be more complicated.
It doesn't necessarily have to include
just two terms it may include more terms.
But in all these cases, so
the strategy would be same.
So, basically, to ensure that
the operators you introduce are indeed
creation operators and
second that they simplify our Hamiltonian.
So now, we can sort of keep this
constraint in mind or we can resolve it
once and for all by just using
new if you want of this u and v.
So in this can be achieved by using
the following mathematical identity.
So if we have, if we use the introduce u
of q being a cause of hyperbolic cosign.
So let me remind you that
the hyperbolic cosign of sum x
is equal to e to the power x
plus minus x divided by two.
And the hyperbolic sine of x
is equal to divided by two.
So this is a real version of the sine
cosine in which case I would have
had the measure in constant i here.
But in any case these guys satisfy
the following identity which is
sort of an analog of the identity that
most of you know that sine squared
plus cosine squared is equal to one so
here for the hyperbolic functions I have
the hyperbolic cosines squared minus the
hyperbolic sine squared is equal to one.
And this is exactly the identity
that I want for my uvn, so.
And so if I use this preposition which
resolves as this identity once and for
all, so which basically it reduces the
problem with two parameters to a problem
with just single parametering,
in this case, is lambda.
So my sort of expression for
the creation and
annihilation operators and
it now becomes this, okay?
So I have a of q is equal to cosine
hyperbolic of lambda b q plus sign
hyperbolic of p of minus q dagger and
the corresponding a dagger All right.
So now what needs to be done is that we
have to just do a brute force analysis.
We have just to go ahead and plug in
these expressions into the Hamiltonian.
And I will leave it for
those of you are interested, for
those of you who for instance
are interested in becoming theorists, or
who are theorists or mathematicians,
or are just curious about the.
Technical parts so
you can go ahead and do the simple,
I don't want to call it simple it's a
straightforward exercise of just plugging
in let's say instead of this guy here
we're going to put this combination,
instead of this guy we're going to put
this thing in combination et cetera and
so if you do so.
Well you will see some
unpleasant algebra but
this is an exercise I'm
sure you can do it.
So here I'm showing the result of
the calculation if you do everything
correctly this is what you should get.
And the result here is a Hamiltonian
which now is expressed in terms of
these new operators b of q and
b dagger of q.
And as you can see it has the form which
is pretty much the same as we had before
just with some nuclear coefficients which
we call now ie tilde and b tilde and
here is the expressions for these
coefficients involving hyperbolic cosines
of two and
hyperbolic sines of two lambda and
these are the original coefficients
in the Hamiltonian for.
And so you may ask me,
what, why did we bother to
introduce new operations if we
got exactly the same thing.
So while the answer to this and
actually this brings me to the second step
in this Bogoliubov transformation is that.
Well, lambda here is a free parameters.
So measure to say, free function.
We can choose this function
any way we see fit.
In particular, we can choose it
such that this unwanted term,
the bad term that we don't want to see,
is identically equal to zero.
So essentially can set
by hand the b tilde of q
equal to zero which leads
to an equation for lambda.
So this equation, you can see from here,
if we just move this guy to the right
hand side and divide by cosine.
So sine hyperbolic or cosine
hyperbolic is tangent hyperbolic, so
the tangent hyperbolic of
2 lambda of q is equal
to minus b of q versus over a of q.
And so this essentially gives
us a specific result for
this lambda of q which
ensures that our Hamiltonian
in terms of this new creation and
looks simple.
So now let me clean it up a little bit and
sort of summarize things.
Again so this is the result that we got,
and also let me remind you that this a of
q and d of q the original
coefficients we didn't know,
and so we derived them in
the previous part of this lecture.
And so let me remind you their explicit
form, so here is their explicit form so
this is explicitly b of q, and
this is explicitly a of q.
And well I wrote it sort of explicitly
this way but as you can see a lot of
things here cancel out including this
h omega there are a lot of other
simplifications involved and if you
play around with this well with these.
If you do a little bit of algebra,
you will see that,
first of all lambda of q actually
determines as you can see from here,
this guided zero as we wanted it to be,
but now,
this guy is determined by lambda and we do
know lambda, so we simply plug it in here.
And if you once everything is said and
done you actually have
an explicit expression for
this a tilde of q which becomes in
the end of the day surprisingly simple.
So again this calculation is not obvious
from here it requires a little bit of work
and due to the format of the lectures and
lack of time.
I'm not presenting it but those of you who
are interested of course can go ahead and
check that this is indeed the result.
So this is by construction but
a of q has this form, so if we plot it, so
this a of q has this form which
is actually a very familiar form.
This is A(q) which we have seen
before in the classical problem,
in the context of acoustic forms.
And this is exactly what they are,
but now they are quantum form.
So sort of to summarize the result and
also to emphasize a very important point,
so this is what actually got.
We have found explicitly a series
of linear transformations
of the regional Hamiltonian.
Or the regional operators
involved in the Hamiltonian.
Besides that,
the Hamiltonian can be cast in this form,
which is the so-called diagonal
form of the Hamiltonian.
Sometimes if you happen
to read research papers,
the research is all about
diagonalization of the Hamiltonian.
This is what it actually means.
So to diagonalize the Hamiltonian
in a problem which
involves many quantum particles
essentially means the ability to write it
as a linear combination of independent
oscillators of some other particles.
The sort of behavior of
which we know very well.
And so this is exactly what
we've accomplished here.
And so here we have also
this herition conjugate, so
if we calculate it it will be simply
the same theorem so we can write it
integral over q well twice a tilde of q.
b dot q bq well I should also mention one
thing that I sort of swept under the rug,
and this thing is that I
haven't paid attention to
constants that appear in the Hamiltonian
so there could be constant here.
If I had done it so
the correct result that I would
have found is well this is correct,
but there also is a constant true here
which corresponds to 0 point motion and
this 0 happens to be exactly one half.
So if you remember the solution to
the simple harmonic oscillator we have
essentially h omega and plus one half and
so similarly it appears here.
So in this 2 a tilde of q is exactly
the energy moods of the oscillator.
So we can call it so
this guy is equal to h.
Omega of q and this would be
the spectrum of the quantum forms.
And this is presented here, so
the spectrum of the quantum form
here is twice omega here is the frequency
of a single oscillator in some sense
in the original classical picture it
would have been the frequency the natural
frequency of this spring connecting
the atoms in some sense.
And so the remarkable thing that I
want to emphasize in the very end, and
this will be the end of today's lecture,
is that it turns out that this spectrum of
quantum phonons is actually identical
to the spectrum of classical forms.
There is absolutely no
difference whatsoever.
So, if you go back to the problem
that we solved earlier today,
in today's lecture, so
namely the classical problem, so
it was a slightly more complicated in the
sense that it involved two types of atoms.
But if we had just one type of atom, so
this is the result we would have got.
The important conclusion of this
sort of discovery that quantum and
classical phonons turn out to be
exactly the same, is the following.
So we can say that we could have
quantized our problem at any stage.
So in the solution, I presented we did so
at the very beginning.
So we essentially converted
the original coordinates, and
[INAUDIBLE] the atoms into quantum
operators, x hat sub n, and p hat sub n.
And then we went ahead with this
quantum calculation transform.
But instead of doing that there is
a second version of this solution one to
have solved the problem,
the classical problem first.
Which means finding the trajectories of
particles and the corresponding waves.
And so one could have quantized
this normal move so basically, so
the normal modes can be converted then
into these essentially operators,
h omega q, some b [INAUDIBLE] q,
bq, plus one half.
So we could have done that.
And, the results, basically we have proven
that the results are exactly the same.
And this is very important.
It shows us something about the quantum
to classical correspondence, and
this quantum to classical
correspondence sort of persists.
Also a more complicated problem, let's say
problems in three dimensions with more
degrees of freedom with
different types of atoms.
And this is true as long as we have
non directing theory which in the language
of these creation and annihilation
operators essentially means a theory
which is bilinear in this b and b dagger.
So as long as we have this bilinear forms,
we're fine with this quantum to
classical correspondence but once we
have more complicated nonlinear terms.
So this situation becomes
much more complicated.
So the last thing I'm going to mention is
that the appearance of such terms which
we're not going to discuss at all,
but, if we had these quadratic terms,
b dagger b dagger b b for
instance, they would have meant that
the form would interact with one another.
So in some sense would have
corresponded to scattering
of waves off each other,
waves running through the crystal.
And this is a very complicated
challenge to understand
the behavior of such
an interacting system and
there are still ongoing theoretical
challenges in describing it.
So it's definitely beyond
the scope of this course.
But this theory is well understood and
I hope some of you got an idea
about phonons and collective modes
in classical and quantum physics.